---
published: false
---
Reading Marx's Capital

So the discussion motivated me to read Capital. I'll share my notes and thoughts, starting with a summary and finishing with an analysis. 
I'm not sure I'll have patience to read til the end given the convoluted style and foundational errors (later chapters strongly rely on assumptions baked into earlier chapters).

## Chapter I 
### Section 1

In this section, Marx explains his labor theory of value introducing three concepts: "use value", "exchange value" and "value" (which underlies the other two and is really the amount of labor).

Marx seems to accept that "use value" is in the eye of the beholder, as it relates to wants and usefulness/utility. But in some places, he seems to say that "use value" is a "property of the object" (ie. not in the eye or mind of the beholder). 
Either way, we'll see that subjective utility in the mind of the consumer (demand) will play no role in determining "exchange value", which he introduces next and is more or less price (more on that later).
Then he wants to show that "exchange value" and "use value" (utility) are just the reflection or the result of an underlying/common concept of "value", which is really the number of labor hours involved in the production. But little is offered to build that case (it is an assertion or assumption, rather than the result of analysis).

Why isn't putting wasteful labor in not enough to produce value, you might ask? 
Well, wasteful/idle labor doesn't count! The labor value in an object is the labor that other people would have to put in (not the labor that *you* put in). He goes as far as to say that it is the *average amount of labor* to produce a good of "its class". 

Land and air are useful (so have "use value"), but do not result from labor, so they have no "value" (the underlying concept).
Putting labor into something that you will consume yourself (a sandwich) does create "use value", but doesn't make the sandwich a "commodity". That would require producing "use value" *for other people*.

### Highlights

* "The nature of such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the stomach or from fancy, makes no difference." (good, no categorical difference between wants and needs)
* "The natural worth of anything consists in its fitness to supply the necessities, or serve the conveniencies of human life" (John Locke)
* "Use value is not a property of the object, it is in the mind of the user." (great, I recognize subjective utility)
* "This property of a commodity is independent of the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful qualities." (ok, so "use value" is not linked to labor. But now it is a property of the commodity not in the mind of the user?)
* "The utility of a thing makes it a use value." (Hum, starting to use confusing terms without introduction: "use value", "utility", "usefulness").
* "A commodity, such as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a use value, something useful." (I knew you'd be confused too)
* "Use values become a reality only by use or consumption [...]" (what does "becoming a reality" mean?)
* "Exchange value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantitative relation, as the proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for those of another sort, a relation constantly changing with time and place." (in short, it's the price)
* "the valid exchange values of a given commodity express something equal"
* "A use value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it." (remember that he does not use the common sense meaning of "value" here)
* "How, then, is the magnitude of this value to be measured? Plainly, by the quantity of the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the article. The quantity of labour, however, is measured by its duration"
* "Commodities, therefore, in which equal quantities of labour are embodied, or which can be produced in the same time, have the same value."
* "We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the value of any article is the amount of labour socially necessary, or the labour time socially necessary for its production." (notice "determines" as in "causally determines", except that he gets the cause and effect reversed...)
* "The labour, however, that forms the substance of value, is homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform labour power."
* "Some people might think that if the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour spent on it, the more idle and unskillful the labourer, the more valuable would his commodity be, because more time would be required in its production." (yes, some people might ;-)
* "Each individual commodity, in this connection, is to be considered as an average sample of its class."
* "A thing can be a use value, without having value. This is the case whenever its utility to man is not due to labour. Such are air, virgin soil, natural meadows"
* "Lastly nothing can have value, without being an object of utility."
* "If the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the labour does not count as labour, and therefore creates no value." (so usefulness does play a role in determining prices, then?)

### Section 2
In this section, he explains that, yes, there are different kinds of labor (weaving vs. tayloring, skilled vs. unskilled), but all labor can be reduced to some uniform blob of unskilled labor (somehow).
Supposedly without loss of generality, labor is treated as inherently and equally valuable, even further as the inherent and ultimate source of value.


### Highlights

* "There are, however, states of society in which one and the same man does tailoring and weaving alternately, in which case these two forms of labour are mere modifications of the labour of the same individual, and not special and fixed functions of different persons" (Marx has a poor understanding of why people specialize and how the division of labor helps them)
* "But the value of a commodity represents human labour in the abstract, the expenditure of human labour in general."
* "A commodity may be the product of the most skilled labour, but its value, by equating it to the product of simple unskilled labour, represents a definite quantity of the latter labour alone."

### Section 3

Strangely, Marx insists that the only way to measure value is by comparing commodities. Only a few paragraphs later, he goes back to labour being the source of value, albeit not being value itself (labour only becomes value when it is embodied into a commodity).

TODO
Note the important assumption illustrated in various quotes below that exchange means equality of value (rather than a double inequality). This means that exchange doesn't create value... (I can already smell from here how this assumption will lead to chastizing bourgeois merchants and middlemen ;-)

More generally, he claims that all commodities (including money) are "equivalent". While that has a superficial validity (commodities can be exchanged for one another), it is very misleading as each act of exchange affects the price. He later makes a strange claim that equivalency is not symmetrical (you can exchange A for B, but not B for A).

To help you understand his language: from this notion of equivalency and the underlying value coming from labor, he talks about "value forms", where the value (really the labor) can take different but equivalent forms.

### Highlights

* "If, however, we bear in mind that the value of commodities has a purely social reality, and that they acquire this reality only in so far as they are expressions or embodiments of one identical social substance, viz., human labour, it follows as a matter of course, that value can only manifest itself in the social relation of commodity to commodity." (the only positive thing I can say of this quote is that, yes, value is not a chemical property of commodities)
* "Everyone knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities have a value form common to them all, and presenting a marked contrast with the varied bodily forms of their use values. I mean their money form."
* "The value of the linen can therefore be expressed only relatively — i.e., in some other commodity. The relative form of the value of the linen presupposes, therefore, the presence of some other commodity — here the coat — under the form of an equivalent." (Earlier, it seemed that labor was the accounting unit of value. Now value can only be expressed relatively to other commodities?)
* "Human labour, creates value, but is not itself value. It becomes value only in its congealed state, when embodied in the form of some object." (what about services?)
* "The value of the commodity linen is expressed by the bodily form of the commodity coat, the value of one by the use value of the other. As a use value, the linen is something palpably different from the coat; as value, it is the same as the coat, and now has the appearance of a coat. Thus the linen acquires a value form different from its physical form. The fact that it is value, is made manifest by its equality with the coat"
* "In order to tell us that its own value is created by labour in its abstract character of human labour, it says that the coat, in so far as it is worth as much as the linen, and therefore is value, consists of the same labour as the linen."
* "And a given quantity of any commodity contains a definite quantity of human labour."
* "If, say in consequence of the exhaustion of flax-growing soil, the labour time necessary for the production of the linen be doubled, the value of the linen will also be doubled. Instead of the equation, yards of linen = 1 coat, we should have 20 yards of linen = 2 coats" (if anyone thinks he means price at this point, hold on to your socks)
* "But because this concrete labour, tailoring in our case, ranks as, and is directly identified with, undifferentiated human labour, it also ranks as identical with any other sort of labour, and therefore with that embodied in the linen. Consequently, although, like all other commodity-producing labour, it is the labour of private individuals, yet, at the same time, it ranks as labour directly social in its character. This is the reason why it results in a product directly exchangeable with other commodities."
* "He further sees that the value relation which gives rise to this ex-pression makes it necessary that the house should qualitatively be made the equal of the bed, and that, without such an equalisation, these two clearly different things could not be compared with each other as commensurable quantities. "Exchange," [Aristotle] says, "cannot take place without equality, and equality not without commensurability""
* "Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us, what barred the way to his further analysis; it was the absence of any concept of value. What is that equal something, that common substance, which admits of the value of the beds being expressed by a house? Such a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle. And why not? Compared with the beds, the house does represent something equal to them, in so far as it represents what is really equal, both in the beds and the house. And that is — human labour."
* "The secret of the expression of value, namely, that all kinds of labour are equal and equivalent, because, and so far as they are human labour in general, cannot be deciphered, until the notion of human equality has already acquired the fixity of a popular prejudice."
* "The brilliancy of Aristotle's genius is shown by this alone, that he discovered, in the expression of the value of commodities, a relation of equality. The peculiar conditions of the society in which he lived, alone prevented him from discovering what, "in truth", was at the bottom of this equality."
* "Like all other commodities, [money] was also capable of serving as an equivalent" (yes, money is can be just a commodity, but the equivalence assumption is still wrong)
* "So soon as it monopolises this position in the expression of value for the world of commodities, it becomes the money commodity,"

### Section 4

More on the theme of exchange as equality, and equality of labour.
The analysis of Crusoe economics is quite poor and is magically translated to a thought experiment where a whole society just works (as one giant Crusoe, making plans, decisions, producing and consuming). Bam!

### Highlights

* "The equality of all sorts of human labour is expressed objectively by their products all being equally values; the measure of the expenditure of labour power by the duration of that expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of value of the products of labour; and finally, the mutual relations of the producers, within which the social character of their labour affirms itself, take the form of a social relation between the products."
* "The equalisation of the most different kinds of labour can be the result only of an abstraction from their inequalities, or of reducing them to their common denominator, viz., expenditure of human labour power or human labour in the abstract."
* "whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products, by that very act, we also equate, as human labour,"
* "Let us now picture to ourselves, by way of change, a community of free individuals, carrying on their work with the means of production in common, in which the labour power of all the different individuals is consciously applied as the combined labour power of the community. All the characteristics of Robinson's labour are here repeated, but with this difference, that they are social, instead of individual." (Magical extrapolation of Crusoe economics to a whole society. Bam, society just works as a giant individual with a single mind!)
* "We will assume, but merely for the sake of a parallel with the production of commodities, that the share of each individual producer in the means of subsistence is determined by his labour time." (smell Marx's thesis yet? I also love the bit down the page about "a definite social plan" which coordinates everyone...)
* "So far no chemist has ever discovered exchange value either in a pearl or a diamond." (correct)

## Chapter II

Here Marx covers exchange and the emergence and role of money in somewhat more details.
Money is just a commodity, which became special (the universal commodity of exchange) by some unspecified social act.
Exchange ratios (prices) are initially determined by the willingness of owners to separate themselves from the objects being exchanged. But over time (as exchange increases), production is what determines the exchange ratios.
Precious metals have a special fitness for the role of money (to be covered later, although I peaked ahead and was already not impressed).
Money, just like commodities, can only express its value by comparison with other commodities. Yet that value is just the amount of labor. (contradiction).

* "To be the universal equivalent, becomes, by this social process, the specific function of the commodity thus excluded by the rest. Thus it becomes — money."
* "The necessity for giving an external expression to this contrast [between value and use value] for the purposes of commercial intercourse, urges on the establishment of an independent form of value, and finds no rest until it is once for all satisfied by the differentiation of commodities into commodities and money." (you will notice this pattern in a few places, somewhat commodities or processes take on a life of their own. Austrians in contrast explain how money emerges step by step in micro terms, with acting men as the only actors)
* "alienable" (this is the first use of the term in the book, I take it to mean "can be separate from", but you will see this in many following passages)
* "The proportions in which they are exchangeable are at first quite a matter of chance. What makes them exchangeable is the mutual desire of their owners to alienate them."
* "the quantitative proportion in which the articles are exchangeable, becomes dependent on their production itself. Custom stamps them as values with definite magnitudes." (production determines exchange ratios?)
* "In proportion as exchange bursts its local bonds, and the value of commodities more and more expands into an embodiment of human labour in the abstract, in the same proportion the character of money attaches itself to commodities that are by nature fitted to perform the social function of a universal equivalent. Those commodities are the precious metals."
* "The use value of the money commodity becomes twofold. In addition to its special use value as a commodity (gold, for instance, serv-ing to stop teeth, to form the raw material of articles of luxury, etc), it acquires a formal use value, originating in its specific social function." (correct)
* "In this sense every commodity is a symbol, since, in so far as it is value, it is only the material envelope of the human labour spent upon it."
* "although we may be aware that gold is money, and consequently directly exchangeable for all other commodities, yet that fact by no means tells how much 10 lbs, for instance, of gold is worth." (correct)
* "Money, like every other commodity, cannot express the magnitude of its value except relatively in other commodities." (strange as he also argued that value is measurable in duration of labour, you will see this tension appear again later)
* "This value is determined by the labour time required for its production, and is expressed by the quantity of any other commodity that costs the same amount of labour-time."
* "The difficulty lies, not in comprehending that money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why, and by what means a commodity becomes money." (see the contradiction in the last few lines? The value of commodities lies in their amount of labor-time, money is a commodity, yet the value of money can only be expressed relative to other commodities)

## Chapter III
### Section 1
In this chapter, Marx goes from vaguely comprehensible (but faulty) labor theory of value to plain incoherence.

Only now is the concept of price introduced. (Which may make you wonder what Marx previously meant by "exchange value" or "proportions of exchanges")
We already saw that  "value" can take multiple forms (it can be embodied into an object). Price is one of those forms.
Price expresses the value of a commodity in terms of money. It is equivalent to labor hours, just like the relative value of two commodities states their equivalency. Price is the exchange ratio of a commodity with money, but that ratio is not the ratio of value between the commodity and the money commodity. (Marx tries to circle the square.)
Prices don't express value after all.
Some things can have a price without having value (!?). For example, things that are not commodities (conscience, honor). But they then take the form of a commodity (!?).
So price is really not expressing value. Another example is uncultivated land, which has no value.
Prices mean that a first commodity is equivalent to another one (because the one can be exchanged for the other). But that doesn't mean the other can be exchanged for the first (!?).

* "The expression of the value of a commodity in gold — x commodity A = y money commodity — is its money form or price." (finally introducing the concept of price)
* "As measure of value, and as standard of price, money has two entirely distinct functions to perform. It is the measure of value inasmuch as it is the socially recognised incarnation of human labour; it is the standard of price inasmuch as it is a fixed weight of metal. As the measure of value it serves to convert the values of all the manifold commodities into prices, into imaginary quantities of gold; as the standard of price it measures those quantities of gold." (again why use weight rather than hours of labor as units, if that is really the underlying extensive dimension?)
* "But only insofar as it is itself a product of labour, and, therefore, potentially variable in value, can gold serve as a measure of value.
* "With English writers the confusion between measure of value and standard of price (standard of value) is indescribable. Their functions, as well as their names, are constantly interchanged." (I'm sorry to say but Marx doesn't strike me as offering clear and distinct concepts either)
* "It is, in the first place, quite clear that a change in the value of gold does not, in any way, affect its function as a standard of price. No matter how this value varies, the proportions between the values of different quantities of the metal remain constant." (yes, the quantity of money doesn't matter. If you have twice as much gold, then prices are halfed. But Marx doesn't realize this does not fit with a labor theory of value. If gold is a certain amount of labor, then it doesn't matter that you have twice as much gold, what matters is equating how much labor it "contains".)
* "a change in the value of gold does not interfere with its functions as a measure of value. The change affects all commodities simultaneously, and, therefore, caeteris paribus leaves their relative values inter se unaltered, although those values are now expressed in higher or lower gold prices."
* "The debasing of money carried on for centuries by kings and princes to such an extent that, of the original weights of the coins, nothing in fact remained but the names." (correct)
* "Price is the money name of the labour realised in a commodity."
* "Hence the expression of the equivalence of a commodity with the sum of money constituting its price, is a tautology, just as in general the expression of the relative value of a commodity is a statement of the equivalence of two commodities."
* "But although price, being the exponent of the magnitude of a commodity's value, is the exponent of its exchange ratio with money, it does not follow that the exponent of this exchange ratio is necessarily the exponent of the magnitude of the commodity's value." (I guess my reading of previous chapters about the link from labor to value to exchange ratio or price must have been wrong)
* "Magnitude of value expresses a relation of social production, it expresses the connection that necessarily exists between a certain article and the portion of the total labour time of society required to produce" (oh, ok, so value is still labor)
* "As soon as magnitude of value is converted into price, the above necessary relation takes the shape of a more or less accidental exchange ratio between a single commodity and another, the money commodity." (what happened to exchange involving two equivalent values, ie two equal amounts of labor time?)
* "The price form, however, is not only compatible with the possibility of a quantitative incongruity between magnitude of value and price, i.e., between the former and its expression in money, but it may also conceal a qualitative inconsistency, so much so, that, although money is nothing but the value form of commodities, price ceases altogether to express value." 
* "Objects that in themselves are no commodities, such as conscience, honour, etc, are capable of being offered for sale by their holders, and of thus acquiring, through their price, the form of commodities. Hence an object may have a price without having value. The price in that case is imaginary, like certain quantities in mathematics. On the other hand, the imaginary price form may sometimes conceal either a direct or indirect real value relation; for instance, the price of uncultivated land, which is without value, because no human labour has been incorporated in it."
* "Price, like relative value in general, expresses the value of a commodity (e.g., a ton of iron), by stating that a given quantity of the equivalent (e. g., an ounce of gold), is directly exchangeable for iron. But it by no means states the converse, that iron is directly exchange-able for gold." (so A is equivalent to B, but B is not necessarily equivalent to A)
* "In order, therefore, that a commodity may in practice act effectively as exchange value, it must quit its bodily shape, must transform itself from mere imaginary into real gold, although to the commodity such transubstantiation may be more difficult than to the Hegelian "concept", the transition from "necessity" to "freedom", or to a lobster the casting of his shell, or to Saint Jerome the putting off of the old Adam." (there is a lot more of that nonsense where this came from)
* "A price therefore implies both that a commodity is exchangeable for money, and also that it must be so exchanged." (that is actually correct, there is no price unless the exchange takes place)

### Section 2
Explores the roles of buyer and seller in an exchange. They are basically symmetric, except the the buyer spends money and the seller spends some other commodity.
But then goes on to consider whether "the movement of money causes the movement of commodities", or maybe the other way around... (That is a silly question, as the cause of both movements are the needs of acting men)
He considers a weaver producing linen, selling it, then buying a Bible. The weaver starts with a commodity, temporarily has some money and ends up with another (C-M-C).
Paper money has just a symbol for actual gold. (Shouldn't it be more valuable, since it is gold plus some labor to produce the note? What about fiat currency without backing gold?)

### Highlights

* "When once a commodity has found a resting-place, where it can serve as a use value, it falls out of the sphere of exchange into that of consumption."
* "Commodities, first of all, enter into the process of exchange just as they are. The process then differentiates them into commodities and money, and thus produces an external opposition corresponding to the internal opposition inherent in them, as being at once use values and values. Commodities as use values now stand opposed to money as exchange value. On the other hand, both opposing sides are commodities, unities of use value and value. But this unity of differences manifests itself at two opposite poles, and at each pole in an opposite way. Being poles they are as necessarily opposite as they are connected. On the one side of the equation we have an ordinary commodity, which is in reality a use value. Its value is expressed only ideally in its price, by which it is equated to its opponent, the gold, as to the real embodiment of its value. On the other hand, the gold, in its metallic reality, ranks as the embodiment of value, as money. Gold, as gold, is exchange value itself. As to its use value, that has only an ideal existence, represented by the series of expressions of relative value in which it stands face to face with all other commodities, the sum of whose uses makes up the sum of the various uses of gold. These antagonistic forms of commodities are the real forms in which the process of their exchange moves and takes place."
* "Let us now accompany the owner of some commodity — say, our old friend the weaver of linen — to the scene of action, the market." (great)
* "our friend's commodity must, above all things, be a use value to the owner of the money." (correct. Maybe the exchange takes place because the buyer values the commodity more than the money? Also note that although the buyer may use the commodity for further production, not just consumption)
* "Moreover, although our weaver's labour may be a recognised branch of the social division of labour, yet that fact is by no means sufficient to guarantee the utility of his 20 yards of linen. If the community's want of linen, and such a want has a limit like every other want, should already be saturated by the products of rival weavers, our friend's product is superfluous, redundant, and consequently useless." (great, some hint at the notion of demand)
* "But suppose his product turn out a real use value, and thereby attracts money? The question arises, how much will it attract? No doubt the answer is already anticipated in the price of the article, in the exponent of the magnitude of its value."
* "We suppose him to have spent on his product only that amount of labour time that is on an average socially necessary."
* "The price then, is merely the money name of the quantity of social labour realised in his commodity." (so we're back to the price being determined by the amount of labor)
* "We see then, commodities are in love with money" (again an instance of inanimate objects have intentions)
* "The quantitative division of labour is brought about in exactly the same spontaneous and accidental manner as its qualitative division. The owners of commodities therefore find out, that the same division of labour that turns them into independent private producers, also frees the social process of production and the relations of the individual producers to each other within that process, from all dependence on the will of those producers, and that the seeming mutual independence of the individuals is supplemented by a system of general and mutual dependence through or by means of the products." (it's unclear in what way to can say that the division of labor makes producers more independent, to the contrary they are dependent on other for more things)
* "In other words, a sale is a purchase, C—M is also M—C."
* "Gold, as we saw, became ideal money, or a measure of values, in consequence of all commodities measuring their values by it" (no, commodities don't act, only men do)
* "Because money is the metamorphosed shape of all other commodities, the result of their general alienation, for this reason it is alienable itself without restriction or condition."
* "These characters of seller and buyer are therefore not permanent, but attach themselves in turns to the various persons engaged in the circulation of commodities." (yes, first there is no difference between buying and selling in that two commodities are exchanged, and second every individual alternatively wears the hat of buyer and seller across multiple transactions)
* "The circulation of commodities differs from the direct exchange of products (barter), not only in form, but in substance." (does he mean the double-coincidence of needs?)
* "It may, of course, happen that A and B make simultaneous purchases, the one from the other; but such exceptional transactions are by no means the necessary result of the general conditions of the circulation of commodities."
* "When one commodity replaces another, the money commodity always sticks to the hands of some third person. [footnote:] Self-evident as this may be, it is nevertheless for the most part unobserved by political economists, and especially by the "Free-trader Vulgaris"." (yes, there are three commodities and three parties, each of the parties ends up with one of the commodities. It's not clear what the footnote implies.)
* "Nothing can be more childish than the dogma, that because every sale is a purchase, and every purchase a sale, therefore the circulation of commodities necessarily implies an equilibrium of sales and purchases." (sadly he didn't manage to enlighten my childish dogma...)
* "If the interval in time between the two complementary phases of the complete metamorphosis of a commodity become too great, if the split between the sale and the purchase become too pronounced, the intimate connexion between them, their oneness, asserts itself by producing — a crisis. The anti-thesis, use value and value; the contradictions that private labour is bound to manifest itself as direct social labour, that a particularised concrete kind of labour has to pass for abstract human labour; the contradiction between the personification of objects and the representation of persons by things; all these antitheses and contradictions, which are immanent in commodities, assert themselves, and develop their modes of motion, in the antithetical phases of the metamorphosis of a commodity." (who said poetic language isn't a good substitute for economic analysis?)
* "The movement of the com-modity is therefore a circuit. On the other hand, the form of this movement precludes a circuit from being made by the money. The result is not the return of the money, but its continued removal further and further away from its starting-point." (in case it didn't come across, he will critizice the M-C-M process shortly)
* "The commodity is always in the hands of the seller; the money, as a means of purchase; always in the hands of the buyer. And money serves as a means of purchase by realising the price of the commodity. This realisation transfers the commodity from the seller to the buyer and removes the money from the hands of the buyer into those of the seller, where it again goes through the same process with another commodity. That this one-sided character of the money's motion arises out of the two-sided character of the commodity's motion, is a circumstance that is veiled over." (this veil sounds mysterious)
* "Hence although the movement of the money is merely the expression of the circulation of commodities, yet the contrary appears to be the actual fact, and the circulation of commodities seems to be the result of the movement of the money." (neither commodities nor money causes the circulation of the other, only acting men cause such circulation)
* "The weight of metal in the silver and copper tokens is arbitrarily fixed by law. When in currency, they wear away even more rapidly than gold coins. Hence their functions are totally independent of their weight, and consequently of all value. The function of gold as coin becomes completely independent of the metallic value of that gold. Therefore things that are relatively without value, such as paper notes, can serve as coins in its place. This purely symbolic character is to a certain extent masked in metal tokens. In paper money it stands out plainly." (where did the labor explanation of the value of commodities go?)
* "The State puts in circulation bits of paper on which their various denominations, say £ 1 , £5, etc, are printed. In so far as they actually take the place of gold to the same amount, their movement is subject to the laws that regulate the currency of money itself. A law peculiar to the circulation of paper money can spring up only from the proportion in which that paper money represents gold. Such a law exists; stated simply, it is as follows: the issue of paper money must not exceed in amount the gold (or silver as the case may be) which would actually circulate if not replaced by symbols." (oh, ok, contrary to the previous quote paper bills are just receipts for real gold in the proper amount then)
* "Paper money is a token representing gold or money. [...] Only in so far as paper money represents gold, which like all other commodities has value, is it a symbol of value. [...] one may ask why gold is capable of being replaced by tokens that have no value? But, as we have already seen, it is capable of being so replaced only in so far as it functions exclusively as coin, or as the circulating medium, and as nothing else."

### Section 3
This section doesn't add much. He introduces hoarding, and briefly mentions debtors and creditors. He claims without elaboration that debtors and civilizations are victimized by creditors.
He hints that all contracts being expressed in money is somehow destructive, again without elaboration.

### Highlights
* "Commodities are thus sold not for the purpose of buying others, but in order to replace their commodity form by their money form. [...] From being the mere means of effecting the circulation of commodities, this change of form becomes the end and aim."
* "In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form a hoard, it must be prevented from circulating, or from transforming itself into a means of enjoyment. The hoarder, therefore, makes a sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish. He acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention. On the other hand, he can withdraw from circulation no more than what he has thrown into it in the shape of commodities. The more he produces, the more he is able to sell. Hard work, saving, and avarice, are, therefore, his three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political economy." (you must appreciate how saving gold is necessarily a gold fetish, not saving for future exchange and consumption, or maybe insuring against risks)
* "with the development of circulation, conditions arise under which the alienation of commodities becomes separated, by an interval of time, from the realisation of their prices." (he's introducing the idea of paying before you receive the good, or paying at a later time)
* "The value form of commodities, money, is therefore now the end and aim of a sale, and that owing to a social necessity springing out of the process of circulation itself."
* "Whenever there is a general and ex-tensive disturbance of this mechanism, no matter what its cause, money becomes suddenly and immediately transformed, from its mere-ly ideal shape of money of account, into hard cash. Profane commodities can no longer replace it. The use value of commodities becomes valueless, and their value vanishes in the presence of its own independent form. On the eve of the crisis, the bourgeois, with the self-sufficiency that springs from intoxicating prosperity, declares money to be a vain imagination. Commodities alone are money. But now the cry is everywhere: money alone is a commodity!" (not sure what he's saying here, sounds like psychologizing and also vaguely Keynesian, blaming crises on lack of demand)
* "In a crisis, the antithesis between commodities and their value form, money, becomes heightened into an absolute contradiction."
* "It becomes the commodity that is the universal subject-matter of all contracts. Rents, taxes, and such like payments are transformed from payments in kind into money payments."
* "To what extent this transformation depends upon the general conditions of production, is shown, to take one example, by the fact that the Roman Empire twice failed in its attempt to levy all contributions in money. The unspeakable misery of the French agricultural population under Louis XIV, a misery so eloquently de-nounced by Boisguillebert, Marshal Vauban, and others, was due not only to the weight of the taxes, but also to the conversion of taxes in kind into money taxes."
* "The development of money into a medium of payment makes it necessary to accumulate money against the dates fixed for the payment of the sums owing. [...] While hoarding, as a distinct mode of acquiring riches, vanishes with the progress of civil society, the formation of reserves of the means of payment grows with that progress."
* "Countries in which the bourgeois form of production is developed to a certain extent, limit the hoards concentrated in the strong rooms of the banks to the minimum required for the proper performance of their peculiar functions. Whenever these hoards are strikingly above their average level, it is, with some exceptions, an indication of stagnation in the circulation of commodities, of an interruption in the even flow of their metamorphoses."

## Chapter IV
Introduces the notion of capital, which is really just money, but in M-C-M transactions.
Marx compares C-M-C flows with M-C-M flows and concludes that they are different and that the latter is the result of capitalists motivated by greed, not a desire to consume. That flow takes on a life of its own, siphoning ever more wealth.
He goes into painting the evils of this process. Unlike C-M-C which is just to obtain another commodity of equivalent value (early mistake), the M-C-M flow seems to result in more value (more money at the end, which is observable since it is the same commodity on both ends of the process, namely money).
The M-C-M flow is illustrated by the merchant selling for more what he bought for less.

### Highlights

* "As a matter of history, capital, as opposed to landed property, invariably takes the form at first of money; it appears as moneyed wealth, as the capital of the merchant and of the usurer. But we have no need to refer to the origin of capital in order to discover that the first form of appearance of capital is money."
* "The first distinction we notice between money that is money only, and money that is capital, is nothing more than a difference in their form of circulation. The simplest form of the circulation of commodities is C—M—C, the transformation of commodities into money, and the change of the money back again into commodities; or selling in order to buy. But alongside of this form we find another specifically different form: M—C—M, the transformation of money into commodities, and the change of commodities back again into money; or buying in order to sell. Money that circulates in the latter manner is thereby transformed into, becomes capital, and is already potentially capital."
* "Now it is evident that the circuit M—C—M would be absurd and without meaning if the intention were to exchange by this means two equal sums of money, £100 for £100. The miser's plan would be far simpler and surer; he sticks to his £100 instead of exposing it to the dangers of circulation."
* "[The merchant's] money has, at all events, gone through a characteristic and original movement, quite different in kind from that which it goes through in the hands of the peasant"
* "In the first form the movement is brought about by the intervention of money, in the second by that of a commodity."
* "He lets the money go, but only with the sly intention of getting it back again. The money, therefore, is not spent, it is merely advanced."
* "in M— C—M, the reflux of the money is conditioned by the very mode of its expenditure." (the initial spending is conditioned on getting money back)
* "The circuit C—M—C starts with one commodity, and finishes with another, which falls out of circulation and into consumption." (this ignores buying goods to produce other goods, such as the farmer buying seeds or the weaver buying thread)
* "The exchange of products, of the different materials in which the labour of society is embodied, forms here the basis of the movement. It is otherwise in the circulation M—C—M, which at first sight appears purposeless,"
* "This increment or excess over the original value I call "surplus value". The value originally advanced, therefore, not only remains intact while in circulation, but adds to itself a surplus value or expands itself. It is this movement that converts it into capital."
* "The farmer may sell his corn above its value, or may buy the clothes at less than their value. [...] such differences in value are purely accidental. [...] The fact that the corn and the clothes are equivalents, does not deprive the process of all meaning, as it does in M—C—M. The equivalence of their values is rather a necessary condition to its normal course."
* "If now, the £110 be spent as money, they cease to play their part. They are no longer capital. Withdrawn from circulation, they become petrified into a hoard, and though they remained in that state till doomsday, not a single farthing would accrue to them."
* "The circulation of money as capital is, on the contrary, an end in itself, for the expansion of value takes place only within this constantly renewed movement. The circulation of capital has therefore no limits."
* "The expansion of value, which is the objective basis or mainspring of the circulation M—C—M, becomes his subjective aim, and it is only in so far as the appropriation of ever more and more wealth in the abstract becomes the sole motive of his operations, that he functions as a capitalist, that is, as capital personified and endowed with consciousness and a will. Use values must therefore never be looked upon as the real aim of the capitalist ; neither must the profit on any single transaction. The restless neverending process of profit-making alone is what he aims at. This boundless greed after riches, this passionate chase after exchange value is common to the capitalist and the miser; but while the miser is merely a capitalist gone mad, the capitalist is a rational miser. The neverending augmentation of exchange value, which the miser strives after, by seeking to save his money from circulation, is attained by the more acute capitalist, by constantly throwing it afresh into circulation thus assumes an automatically active character."
* "that same value now in the circulation M—C—M, or the circulation of capital, suddenly presents itself as an independent substance, endowed with a motion of its own, passing through a life process of its own, in which money and commodities are mere forms which it assumes and casts off in turn."
* "Value therefore now becomes value in process, money in process, and, as such, capital. It comes out of circulation, enters into it again, preserves and multiplies itself within its circuit, comes back out of it with expanded bulk, and begins the same round ever afresh. M—M', money which begets money [...] Buying in order to sell, or, more accurately, buying in order to sell dearer, M—C—M', appears certainly to be a form peculiar to one kind of capital alone, namely, merchants' capital."

A little hint of Chapter V:
How can processes composed of the same blocks yield apparently different results? Why does one yield surplus value?

"What distinguishes this form from that of the simple circulation of commodities, is the inverted order of succession of the two antithetical processes, sale and purchase. How can this purely formal distinction between these processes change their character as it were by magic?
[...] we must rather look, whether there is in this simple circulation anything permitting an expansion of the value that enters into circulation, and consequently, a creation of surplus value.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A summary:
Marx uses terminology a bit differently than conventional economists. His "use value" is what economists usually refer to as utility or value. (Note that he recognizes that utility is subjective and that exchange implies a double inequality of utility)
His "exchange value" is the price. And because an exchange involves two things of the same price, he proposes that there must be a common determinant or underlying value, which he calls "value" but which he identifies as a quantity of labor. This "value" determines the price.
He then focuses on equality of prices (and consequently of quantity of labor). Every exchange implies an equality of price. But if a person had special power or privilege, they may be able to buy for less or sell for more than the real price (in some sense). 
This leads him to be suspicious of exchanges that yield a greater sum of money (ie non-equality of price). For instance, a lender getting interest on his loan or a merchant selling a good for more than she purchased it for. He concludes such exchanges must be the result of privilege or cheating.
Because labor is the real unit of underlying value (which he calls "value") and labor rests on self-ownership, such improper exchanges must be exploitative and violating the workers' right in his own body and labor (effectively making him a slave).


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some notes:

Interestingly, a few references acknowledge private property (ownership of things).
There is no or little notion that demand affects value or exchange value or price. For example, a house on the beach versus the same house in the Arctic. Or also the example of the ship that transports clothes, but the fashion changes while the ship is at sea.
Money is correctly recognized as just another commodity. But the reasons and the process for the emergence of money are not really spelled out.

Reading Marx's theory of value and prices  makes me appreciate the Austrian contribution even more (Menger, Bohm-Bawerk). Having clear concepts (end, mean, resources/goods, preferences, prices, barter, money, credit) which form a consistent and causal model is very important. When properly explained, it seems tautological, but without such conceptual framework, it is not easy to make sense of observations.
In reading Marx's theory of value, it struck me how little man comes into his picture. He describes commodities, value, exchanges and "relationships" in general terms without the concept of an acting man and his purpose. It seems strangely detached from humans, most of the time. Even worse, he falls into giving commodities some personhood.
Mises takes the perspective of an acting man: an individual, whose perspective is subjective (including his ranking of ends and knowledge).
Overall, my experience so far in reading Marx is that it goes better if you don't resist. Don't think analytically or critically. Accept the vague concepts and associations and go with the flow.
If labour is the real source of value, then productivity-enhancing machines don't deserve any rent, nor do bourgeois middlemen or investors.

In my mind the key mistakes Marx makes: (1) labor can be treated as uniform, (2) the amount of labor is what determines value and prices, (3) exchange implies equality of value, (4) a society can function like Crusoe economics (just have a plan, balance your efforts to produce what you want to consume). Also, he doesn't seem to understand why division of labor or money emerges.
Regarding the form, his terminology, the repetition of similar assertions, and the value-laden terms don't help.

In his search for a theory of value, he does not consider (let along disprove) the theory of marginal utility.
Bohm-Bawerk uses Marx's logic (we can treat all labor as uniform and unskilled by using some socially determined multipliers to reduce skilled labor to unskilled labor) to build an equally absurd weight theory of value (the mass of material is what determines value, and the way to count weight from different elements is to reduce them using socially determined multipliers). Note that there is also a circularity (aren't the socially determined multipliers derived from value?).

(so land, bourgeois middlemen and investors should get no returns)

Although Marx recognize that you wouldn't trade if you didn't expect to get something you like better, he gets distracted by the seen improvement of greater monetary returns and forgets the unseen improvement of greater commodities returns.
Although he recognizes that the farmer faces risk, he ignores that capitalists do too. There is no more guarantee that the merchant will resell higher, than there is for the farmer to sell at the price he hopes for.

In a brief paragraph, I will summarize the Austrian analysis:
Man acts. His action implies some felt un-ease and scarcity (otherwise he would not need to act). It also implies a purpose or goal, which means that he is able to rank potential goals (this order is his subjective valuation). Goals that are expected to directly satisfy him are classified as consumption, while those that are indirect are production (they involve making something else which will help him towards his goal). 
The valuation of goals also implies a valuation of means (if he prefers one goal over another, then he values the means that support that first goal over those that support the other). 
When two individuals have opposite valuation (one values A over B and the other values B over A), then an exchange can take place. When lots of individuals with diverse valuations consider trading together, their individual choices lead to an overall exchange ratio (this is called the price of A in terms of B) which reflects their aggregated valuations.
But the opportunities to trade goods A and B directly (as barter) are limited due to the problem of double-coincidence of wants. It is then tempting to engage in indirect trade (I will trade A for C, knowning that C is marketable and could be traded for B which I want). This leads to some good having a prefered status; it is called money.
Note that the value in the consumer's mind is what determines the value of the good, which determines the value of the production goods that contribute to producing it (and labor too).


Value and labor:
- You have to keep in mind when reading the passages and chapters that "value" is a concept that he introduces, which is unobservable and is really equivalent to a social average of labor hours. This value determines exchange value (prices).
- Such a theory struggles to explain the price of natural resources, what determines the relative price of skilled vs. unskilled labor, why prices can change simply from changes in preferences. So Marx dodges or fudges in multiple places to try an accomodate such frustrating scenarios: he offers no answer to the determination of prices of natural resources, introduces a fudge factor (#1) for normalizing skilled labor into unskilled labor, and another fudge factor (#2) for explaining that it's not really labor hours that count (first, to deal with idle work, and a second time, to deal with useless products).
What I mean by fudge factors is that those are undefined and undetermined. 
- \#1 What is the multiplier for normalizing skilled vs. unskilled labor? As Bohm-Bawerk pointed out, there is a circular reasoning problem: prices of products of skilled vs. unskilled labor being determined by the fudge factor, and the fudge factor determined by relative price of skilled vs. unskilled labor.
- \#2 When does labor not count as labor? If a product loses utility, by how much is the labor discounted?). So they offer escape hatches from the traps of labor theory. 

You could go as far as morphing this labor theory of value back into traditional supply and demand by saying that the fudge factors are determined by supply and demand and dominate the causal determination of prices, while erasing the contributing of labor hours to this determination.
Marx claims that prices are determined by labor, but only principally and there are other (presumably less important) factors. But he does not establish that labor is a determining factor, much less the principal one.


- Some specific examples that frustrate the labor theory of value and show that the fudge factors dominate price determination:
    - Ship transporting clothes when fashion changes (hint: preferences changed causing a shift in demand)
    - House by the beach (same labor)
    - More generally, any change in preferences of sellers or buyers cannot be explained by his model. If I discover how to turn corn into synthetic organs, the price of corn should be pushed up by the additional demand, although the productivity of corn farmers was not affected.
    - Adding more bakers will lower the price
    - (Why not the minimum? Or the median? If the majority of people slack, doesn't that affect the social average?)
- (So what determines the price of land relative to labour-produced commodities? Not answered)
- In contrast with the mainstream and Austrian economic theory of utility and prices, this framework has to plug multiple gaps with ad-hoc and (again) unjustified "explanations".
- (Strangely, if labor hours is the unit of value, why not just that as the unit of accounting? You could say a coat is "10 hours", and an ounce of gold is "5 hours".).
-  (I guess services are not "value" then, yet another hole).
- (If exchange implies equal value, why do sellers give discounts for selling bulk? Why do both parties in a transaction thank each other?)


Equality of value in exchange:
- Marx basically assumes that some underlying characteristic must be equal in an exchange. It leads to a paradox: although money is just a commodity, and the roles of buyer and seller are symmetric, and C-M-C and M-C-M transactions are just chains of the same building blocks, one yields an inequality. Instead of questioning his (faulty) assumption, he claims it is a contradiction or flaw inherent to such transactions.
- Marx ignores the importance of time when he claims that C1-M-C2 transaction result in equal exchange value, whereas M-C-M transactions yield increased value. If a farmer sold his corn with the expectation to be paid later, he would also be able to purchase more corn at the end. 
- Marx recognizes that an investor will not pursue a transaction unless it offers returns better than his starting resources. 
- The different factors that drive returns to investors are: the interest rate (which reflects the time preferences in the market), the risk premium (unlike what Marx suggests, there are no guaranteed returns, as investments fail and borrowers default), and the inflation premium (as the money supply is increased, nominal returns will also grow). Without time or risk, there is almost no opportunity for the middleman to buy from the farmer and resell at a higher price (the farmer would find it beneficial to sell directly to the buyer).
- Marx doesn't stop to wonder, if each exchange is truly about some equality of value, then why would anyone be silly enough to engage in an unequal trade (which let middlemen end up with more money than they started with). If middlemen are just jacking up the price, why don't buyers buy directly from sellers?

Clarity, assertions and repetition:
As a general note, I have not quoted the whole chapters, but have done my best to highlight the key points. Although I read those chapters twice and many passages more than that, many key points appear to be merely assertions which, in my opinion, Marx did little to establish as correct.
Another general note: Marx does not seem to value clarity much.
